# below I denote the category of the quote with three colons in a row

The reasonable man adapts himself to the world; the unreasonable one persists in trying to adapt the world to himself. Therefore all process depends on the unreasonable man. ::: George Bernard Shaw ::: change

The more constraints one imposes, the more one frees one's self of the chains that shackle the spirit. ::: Igor Stravinsky ::: art ::: creativity

Art doesn't have to solve problems, it just has to formulate them correctly. ::: Tolstoy ::: creativity ::: art

Computers are useless. They can only give you answers. ::: Picasso ::: creativity ::: art

No matter how complex and polished the individual operations are, it is often the quality of the glue that most directly determines the power of the system. ::: Hal Abelson ::: programming

There is an obvious and sometimes fearful discrepancy between life as it is and life as it should and could be. But most of us, if we can re-install our confidence in life, try to find ways to bridge this gap. Artists are among those that have a passionate commitment to the completeness of life. Today one doesn't need to have too much imagination, or extra sensitivity to see how the urban life we created for ourselves is not living up to its potential. ::: Gyorgy Kepes ::: art ::: forward-thinking

The only way to communicate is to understand what it is like not to understand ::: Richard Saul Wurman ::: communication

The mark of a free man is that ever-gnawing inner uncertainty as to whether or not he is right. ::: Learned Hand ::: truth ::: judgement


Machines should focus on solving arithmetic problems. People should focus on higher-level issues, such as the reason the answer was needed. ::: Don Norman ::: machines ::: design

The thoughtful use of constraints in design lets people readily determine the proper course of action, even in a novel situation. ::: Don Norman ::: design

Do not quench your inspiration and your imagination; do not become the slave of your model ::: Vincent Van Gogh ::: data

Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge? Where is the knowledge we have lost in information ::: T.S. Eliot ::: data

Inspiration is for amateurs. The rest of us just show up and get to work. ::: Chuck Close ::: general

It is only by selection, by elimination, and by emphasis that we get at the real meaning of things. ::: Georgia O'Keeffe ::: creativity ::: general ::: design

Doubt is not a pleasant condition, but certainty is an absurd one. ::: Voltaire ::: science ::: general

Hell is other people ::: Sartre ::: general

The perfect is the enemy of the good ::: Voltaire ::: general

No one ever made a decision because of a number. They need a story. ::: Daniel Kahneman, as quoted in https://www.nytimes.com/2017/12/24/opinion/2017-wrong-numbers.html?_r=0 ::: general ::: communication

Nothing has caused more time-consuming and adrenalin-producing controversies than the myth that macrocosm and microcosm obey exactly the same laws. ::: Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought ::: biology

I do not believe in things, I believe only in their relationships. ::: Georges Braque

Reduction is a best a vacuous, but more often a thoroughly misleading and futile, approach. ::: Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought ::: biology

Extreme analytical reductionism is a failure because it cannot give proper weight to the interaction of components of a complex system. ::: Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought ::: biology

The most interesting parameter in the statistics of natural populations is the actual variance, its amount, and its nature. ::: Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought ::: biology ::: math

Generalizations in biology are almost invariably of a probabilistic nature. As one wit has formulated it, there is only one universal law in biology: "All biological laws have exceptions." ::: Ernst Mayr, The Growth of Biological Thought ::: biology

A genius is the one most like himself. ::: Thelonious Monk ::: general

The way to love anything is to realize that it might be lost. ::: G. K. Chesterton ::: preferences ::: general

Where we all think alike, no one thinks very much. ::: Walter Lippmann ::: general

It is easier to resist at the beginning than at the end. ::: Leonardo da Vinci ::: general

I hear and I forget. I see and I remember. I do and I understand. ::: Confucius ::: general ::: learning ::: communication

No worthy problem is ever solved within the plane of its original conception. ::: Einstein ::: general ::: problem_solving

If you set out to write a poem about two dogs fucking, and you write a poem about two dogs fucking, then you’ve written a poem about two dogs fucking. ::: Gerald Stern ::: communication

Choices depend on tastes, and tastes depend on past experiences. ::: W. M. Gordon, "Tastes, Habits, and Choice" 1967. as quoted in Vanderbilt 2016 "You May Also Like" p 24. ::: preferences

As much as preference influences choice, choices influence preference...We seem to have a preference that we prefer our preferences. ::: Vanderbilt 2016. ::: preferences

Liking is learning ::: Vanderbilt 2016. ::: preferences

We find only the world we look for ::: Thoreau. ::: preferences ::: nature

Destroying is intimately connected to creating. ::: Maria Popova. ::: creativity ::: general

Our thoughts and feelings are really just chemical transfers in 2.8 pounds of electrified pate. ::: David Foster Wallace. A history of infinity. ::: general

In fact the more fundamental a math concept, the more difficult it usually is to define ::: David Foster Wallace. A history of infinity. ::: math ::: general

Induction is, logically speaking, foundation less, whereas mathematical truths are built on the granite of axioms and rules of inference. ::: David Foster Wallace. A history of infinity. ::: math

The beauty of a good experiment is control ::: Jonah Berger. Invisible influence. ::: science

The road not only to better theories but to a better society is paved with linguistic precision. ::: ? possibly quoted in Berged. View of Karl Kraus. ::: science ::: general

Opposition is true friendship ::: William Blake ::: general

To a worm in horshraddish, the world is harshraddish ::: Yiddish saying ::: general

...to this extent it is not open to men to say: Everyone has his own taste. This would be equivalent to saying there is no such thing as taste at all... ::: Kant ::: preferences

Two of the most important characteristics of good design are discoverability and understanding. Discoverability: Is it possible to even figure out what actions are possible and where and how to perform them? Understanding: What does it all mean? How is the product supposed to be used? What do all the different controls and settings mean? ::: Don Norman. The design of Everyday Things. ::: design

All artificial things are designed. ::: Don Norman. The design of Everyday Things. ::: design

Good design starts with an understanding of psychology and technology. ::: Don Norman. The design of Everyday Things. ::: design

Simplified models are valuable only as long as the assumptions that support them hold true. ::: Don Norman. The design of Everyday Things. ::: design ::: math

The core premise of economic theory is that people choose by optimizing. ::: Richard Thaler. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. ::: preferences ::: economics

Normative theories tell you the right way to think about some problem. By "right" I do not mean right in some moral sense; instead, I mean logically consistent, as prescribed by the optimizing model at the heart of economic reasoning, sometimes called rational choice theory. That is the only way I will use the word "normative" in this book. ::: Richard Thaler. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. ::: preferences ::: economics

They [pragmatic programmers] think beyond the immediate problem, always trying to place it in its larger context, always trying to be aware of the bigger picture. After all, without this larger context, how can you be pragmatic? How can you make intelligent compromises and informed decisions? ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers. ::: self_improvement ::: software_development

Don't live with broken windows. ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers. ::: software_development ::: self_improvement

Striving to be better, oft we mar what's well. ::: Shakespeare. King Lear 1.4 ::: general ::: self_improvement

A good idea is an orphan without effective communication. ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers, p. 18. ::: communication

Plan what you want to say. Write an outline. Then ask yourself, "Does this get across whatever I'm trying to say?" Refine it until it does. ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers, p. 18. ::: communication

We often find that the documents we produce end up being less important than the process we go through to produce them. ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers, p. 18. ::: communication

*W*hat do you want them to learn? What is their *i*nterest in what you've got to say? How *s*ophisticated are they? How much *d*etail do they want? Whom do you want to *o*wn the information? How can you *m*otivate them to listen to you? ::: Andrew Hunt and David Thomas. Pragmatic Programmers, p. 18. ::: communication

The greatest of all weakness is the fear of appearing weak. ::: J. B. Cossuet. Politics from Holy Writ, 1709. ::: general

Expected utility is the right way to make decisions. ::: Richard Thaler. Misbehaving: The Making of Behavioral Economics. ::: preferences ::: economics

Cognition attempts to make sense of the world: emotion assigns value. ::: Don Norman. The design of Everyday Things. ::: design

Let me never fall into the vulgar mistake of dreaming that I am persecuted whenever I am contradicted. ::: Ralph Waldo Emerson ::: general

I don't wait for moods. You accomplish nothing if you do that. Your mind must know it has got to get down to work. ::: Pearl S. Buck

Scientists become method oriented rather than problem oriented. Stop doing experiments for a while and think. ::: Platt(1964), quoted in Pigliucci(2002:92) ::: science

Even the most practical man of affairs is usually in the thrall of the ideas of some long-dead economist. ::: John Maynard Keynes ::: general ::: preferences

Academics fight over resources much more readily than over principles. ::: https://twitter.com/molpopgen/status/512340805923508224 ::: science

Must we geneticists become bacteriologists, physiological chemists and
physicists, simultaneously with being zoologists and botanists? Let us hope so.
:::  H.J. Muller (1922)

The ground rule—or perhaps doctrine would be a better term—is that adaptation
is a special and onerous concept that should be used only where it is really
necessary. ::: G.C. Williams

A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds. ::: Emerson

The History of Science has suffered greatly from the use by teachers of
second-hand material, and the consequent obliteration of the circumstances and
the intellectual atmosphere in which the great discoveries of the past were
made. A first-hand study is always instructive, and often ... full of
surprises. ::: R.A. Fisher, 1955

The natural phenomena of the evolutionary history of man claim an entirely
peculiar place in the wide range of the scientific study of nature. There is
surely no subject of scientific investigation touching man more closely, or in
the knowledge of which he is more deeply concerned, than the human organism
itself; and of all the various branches of the science of man, or anthropology,
the history of his natural evolution should excite his highest interest. :::
Ernst Haeckel (1834–1919), The Evolution of Man (1892), p. 2

The grand aim of all science is to cover the greatest number of empirical facts by logical deduction from the smallest number of hypotheses or axioms. ::: Albert Einstein ::: science

If your idea of happiness has to do with someone else changing what they say,
what they do, you are in for a fucking hard ass road. ::: RuPaul

The tendency of modern scientific teaching is to neglect the great books, to lay far too much stress upon relatively unimportant modern work, and to present masses of detail of doubtful truth and questionable weight in such a way as to obscure principles. ::: R.A. Fisher ::: science

Mathematics is not a careful march down a well-cleared highway, but a journey
into a strange wilderness, where the explorers often get lost. Rigour should be
a signal to the historian that the maps have been made, and the real explorers
have gone elsewhere. ::: William S. Anglin

The whole problem with the world is that fools and fanatics are always so certain of themselves, and wiser people so full of doubts. ::: Bertrand Russell ::: science ::: general

He who asks is a fool for five minutes, but he who does not ask remains a fool forever. ::: Chinese Proverb ::: general ::: learning ::: communication

Never argue with a fool, onlookers may not be able to tell the difference. ::: Mark Twain ::: general

The greatest challenge to any thinker is stating the problem in a way that will allow a solution. ::: Bertrand Russell ::: problem_solving ::: science

As a mathematical discipline travels far from its empirical source, or still
more, if it is a second and third generation only indirectly inspired from
ideas coming from 'reality', it is beset with very grave dangers. It becomes
more and more purely aestheticizing, more and more purely l'art pour l'art.
This need not be bad, if the field is surrounded by correlated subjects, which
still have closer empirical connections, or if the discipline is under the
influence of men with an exceptionally well-developed taste. But there is a
grave danger that the subject will develop along the line of least resistance,
that the stream, so far from its source, will separate into a multitude of
insignificant branches, and that the discipline will become a disorganized mass
of details and complexities. In other words, at a great distance from its
empirical source, or after much 'abstract' inbreeding, a mathematical subject
is in danger of degeneration. At the inception the style is usually classical;
when it shows signs of becoming baroque the danger signal is up. It would be
easy to give examples, to trace specific evolutions into the baroque and the
very high baroque, but this would be too technical. In any event, whenever this
stage is reached, the only remedy seems to me to be the rejuvenating return to
the source: the reinjection of more or less directly empirical ideas. I am
convinced that this is a necessary condition to conserve the freshness and the
vitality of the subject, and that this will remain so in the future. ::: John
von Neumann

An ounce of algebra is worth a ton of verbal argument. ::: J.B.S Haldane ::: science

The business of the statistician is to catalyze the scientific learning
process. ::: George E. P. Box

To do science is to search for repeated patterns, not simply to accumulate the facts. :::  Robert MacArthur, 1972 ::: science

You go to war with the data you have, not the data you wish you had. :::
Richard McElreath

Just about five-eighths (of a century) ago there was a sharp discontinuity:
algebra began to appear on the pages of the statistician's, journals. The
pioneering work of Karl Pearson spread out in many directions; that of Student
spread out in many others, including the analysis of economic time series.
Since that time the tools of the statistician have been sharpened on the
grindstone of algebra and hammered out on the anvil of mathematical models. We
learned rapidly that, to a far greater extent than we had dared to think, one
could use data to deal both with the uncertainties of nature and with the
uncertainties of data-based results. ::: John Tukey

Far better an approximate answer to the right question, which is often vague, than an exact answer to the wrong question, which can always be made precise. ::: John Tukey, 1962 ::: science ::: general

I know of scarcely anything so apt to impress the imagination as the wonderful
form of cosmic order expressed by the law of frequency of error [the Gaussian
distribution]. The law would have been personified by the Greeks if they had
known of it. It reigns with serenity and complete self-effacement amidst the
wildest confusion.  The larger the mob, the greater the apparent anarchy, the
more perfect is its sway. It is the supreme law of unreason. ::: Sir Francis
Galton, 1889

I never dreamed that islands, about fifty or sixty miles apart, and most of
them in sight of each other, formed of precisely the same rocks, placed under a
quite similar climate, rising to a nearly equal height, would have been
differently tenanted. ::: Charles Darwin

Regularization saves your bacon. ::: Richard McElreath ::: data ::: machine learning

I believe that, in the end, it is *applications* which justify mathematics. The
'artistic' justification of pure mathematics in terms of intrinsic qualities
like elegance and generality rings rather hollow in my ears when I compare the
best mathematics with the greatest music. ::: L. C. G. Rogers and Davis Williams
in *Diffusions, Markov Processes, and Martingales*.

But I am very poorly today and very stupid and hate everybody and everything.
::: Charles Darwin ::: mental health

If you want to do something really new, go back to points in the past where
there was a neat idea that never really caught on, and follow the path of that
idea to see where it leads. ::: approximate quote from Marvin Minksy, from
http://aurellem.org/thoughts/html/sussman-reading-list.html

It is difficult to imagine that the blind play of genes could produce man. :::
G.C. Williams.

Those who read own the world, and those who watch television lose it. ::: Werner
Herzog ::: reading ::: knowledge ::: fiction

Hence, as more individuals are produced than can possibly survive, there must
in every case be a struggle for existence, either one individual with another
of the same species, or with the individuals of distinct species, or with the
physical conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with
manifold force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case
there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential restraint from
marriage. Although some species may be now increasing, more or less rapidly, in
numbers, all cannot do so, for the world would not hold them. ::: Charles Darwin (The Origin)


Science is what we understand well enough to explain to a computer. Art is
everything else we do. ::: Donald E. Knuth (in the forward of A = B) ::: art

Inventive genius requires pleasurable mental activity as a condition for its
vigorous exercise. 'Necessity is the mother of invention' is a silly proverb.
'Necessity is the mother of futile dodges' is much nearer to the truth. The
basis of the growth of modern invention is science, and science is almost
wholly the outgrowth of pleasurable intellectual curiosity. - A. N. Whitehead
(quote in Concrete Mathematics)

We may say that, before Maxwell, Physical Reality, in so far as it was to
represent the process of nature, was thought of as consisting in material
particles, whose variations consist only in movements governed by partial
differential equations. Since Maxwell's time, Physical Reality has been thought
of as represented by continuous fields, governed by partial differential
equations, and not capable of any mechanical interpretation. This change in the
conception of Reality is the most profound and the most fruitful that physics
has experienced since the time of Newton. ::: Einstein

Thought is only a flash between two long nights, but this flash is everything. ::: Henri Poincare ::: general ::: problem_solving

Species are merely those strongly marked races or local forms which, when in
contact, do not intermix, and when inhabiting distinct areas are generally
regarded to have had a separate origin, and to be incapable of producing a
fertile hybrid offspring.  But as the test of hybridity cannot be applied in
one case in ten thousand, and even if it could be applied, would prove nothing,
since it is founded on an assumption of the very question to be decided - and
as the test of origin is in every case inapplicable - and as, further, the test
of non-intermixture is useless, except in those rare cases where the most
closely allied species are found inhabiting the same area, it will be evident
that we have no means whatever of distinguishing so-called "true species" from
the several modes of variation here pointed out, and into which they so often
pass by an insensible gradation. :::  A.R. Wallace (1865; "On the phenomena of
variation and geographical distribution as illustrated by the Papilionidae of
the Malayan region", p. 12)

There is a strong and widely held belief that all organisms are perfect and
that everything within them is there for a function. Believers ascribe to the
Darwinian natural selection process a fastidious prescience that it cannot
possible have and some go so far as to think that patently useless features of
existing organisms are there as an investment for the future ...  Even today,
long after the discovery of repetitive sequences and introns, pointing out that
25% of our genome consists of millions of copies of one boring sequence, fails
to move audiences. They are all convinced by the argument that if this DNA were
totally useless, natural selection would already have removed it. Consequently,
it must have a function that still remains to be discovered. Some think that it
could even be there for evolution of the future—that is, to allow the creation
of new genes. As this was done in the past, they argue, why not in the future?
... Some years ago I noticed that there are two kinds of rubbish in the world
and that most languages have different words to distinguish them. There is the
rubbish we keep, which is junk, and the rubbish we throw away, which is
garbage. The excess DNA in our genomes is junk, and it is there because it is
harmless, as well as being useless, and because the molecular processes
generating extra DNA outpace those getting rid of it. Were the extra DNA to
become disadvantageous, it would become subject to selection, just as junk that
takes up too much space, or is beginning to smell, is instantly converted to
garbage. ::: Sydney Brenner

Using R is a bit akin to smoking. The beginning is difficult, one may get
headaches and even gag the first few times. But in the long run, it becomes
pleasurable and even addictive. Yet, deep down, for those willing to be honest,
there is something not fully healthy in it. ::: Francois Pinard

A genuine understanding of the key concepts and principles of the probability
theory is essential for any work in stochastic processes. These concepts are
simple, but treacherously so. There is probably no branch of mathematics in
which it is so easy to advance plausible sounding arguments that are in fact
wrong! ::: Cox & Davison, 1994, p. 25

Maybe it’s because I was raised as a Protestant and became an environmentalist,
but I’ve long been struck by the spiritual kinship of environmentalism and New
England Puritanism. Both belief systems are haunted by the feeling that simply
to be human is to be guilty. In the case of environmentalism, the feeling is
grounded in scientific fact. ::: Jonathan Franzen,
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2015/04/06/carbon-capture

What is found in biology is mechanisms, mechanisms built with chemical
components and that are often modified by other, later, mechanisms added to the
earlier ones. While Occam's razor is a useful tool in the physical sciences, it
can be a very dangerous implement in biology. It is thus very rash to use
simplicity and elegance as a guide in biological research. While DNA could be
claimed to be both simple and elegant, it must be remembered that DNA almost
certainly originated fairly close to the origin of life when things were
necessarily simple or they would not have got going.  Biologists must
constantly keep in mind that what they see was not designed, but rather
evolved. It might be thought, therefore, that evolutionary arguments would play
a large part in guiding biological research, but this is far from the case. It
is difficult enough to study what is happening now. To figure out exactly what
happened in evolution is even more difficult. Thus evolutionary achievements
can be used as hints to suggest possible lines of research, but it is highly
dangerous to trust them too much. It is all too easy to make mistaken
inferences unless the process involved is already very well understood. ::: Francis Crick

Ronald Fisher in England was an advocate of eugenics, and both he and Sewall
Wright in America formulated the principle of natural selection as a process of
increasing, from generation to generation, the average fitness of members of a
breeding population. Yet these formulations make no predictions about a general
progress of species. This may seem odd, since the process of natural selection
is supposed to make organisms more fit for their environment. So why does
evolution not result in a general increase of the fitness of life to the
external world? Wouldn’t that be progress? The reason that there is no general
progress is that the environments in which particular species live are
themselves changing and, relative to the organisms, are usually getting worse.
So most of natural selection is concerned with keeping up. Certainly quite new
kinds of making a living have been occasionally exploited in evolution, but
every species eventually becomes extinct (99.9 percent already have) and no way
of making a living will be around forever.4 Judging from the fossil record a
typical mammalian species lasts roughly ten million years, so we might expect
to last another nine million unless, as a consequence of our immense ability to
manipulate the physical world, we either extinguish ourselves a good deal
sooner or invent some extraordinary way to significantly postpone the
inevitable. ::: Richard Lewontin, http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2005/10/20/the-wars-over-evolution/

"Great" scientists are those who, like Newton, make laws that apply
universally, while lesser ones spend their lives dissecting particular
phenomena. ::: Richard Lewontin

That a theoretical formulation is desirable because it makes it easier and more
efficient to write more articles and books giving simple explanations for
phenomena that are complex and diverse seems a strange justification for work
that claims to be scientific. It confuses "understanding" in the weak sense of
making coherent and comprehensible statements about the real world with
“understanding” that means making correct statements about nature. It makes the
investigation of material nature into an intellectual game, disarming us in our
struggle to maintain science against mysticism. ::: Richard Lewontin

It is, I think, particularly in times of acknowledged crisis that scientists
have turned to philosophical analysis as a device for unlocking the riddles of
their field. ::: Kuhn, 1970, p. 88

If you’re thinking without writing, you only think you’re thinking. ::: Leslie Lamport ::: general ::: communication

The scientist explains the world by successive approximations. ::: Hubble ::: science

Variation is the hard reality . . . Means and medians are the abstractions. ::: Stephen Jay Gould ::: science

For my team, I'll take the younger Darwin of the first edition, when the swing
of his selectionist bat was true. ::: David Queller, "The Spaniels of St. Marx
and the Panglossian Paradox: A Critique of a Rhetorical Programme", 1995

A scientific man ought to have no wishes, no affections, - a mere heart of stone. ::: Charles Darwin ::: science

The most dangerous worldview is the worldview of those who have not viewed the world. ::: Alexander von Humboldt ::: general

Why is thought being a secretion of brain, more wonderful than gravity a property of matter? It is our arrogance, our admiration of ourselves. ::: Charles Darwin, in this transmutation notebook. ::: science

And you say to me, friends, there is no disputing tastes and tasting? But all of life is a dispute over taste and tasting! ::: Nietzsche "Thus Spoke Zarathustra" (?). As quoted in Vanderbilt 2016 p 3. ::: preferences
